# Manipulating Self-Preference for Large Language Models

Authors: Matthew Nguyen, Dani Roytburg, Matthew Bozoukov, Jou Barzdukas, Hongyu Fu

Large language models (LLMs) carry great value as evaluators of synthetic data for research and production settings. However, recent research shows that language models exhibit bias towards their own responses in blind model-to-model evaluation settings. Self-preference bias shows clear negative effects on effective Judge Model Development, our chosen research track. We first identify instances of this phenomenon at the behavioral level, robustly demonstrating that two models – Llama 3.1-8b-Instruct and DeepSeek V3 – exhibit this behavior. Then, fo- cusing on Llama, we construct a steering vector from the residual stream of the model that represents the “self-preference” direction. Then, we demonstrate that the vector causally im- pacts a model’s ability to assert self-preference by applying the vector to the model’s output as it generates it (steering). When steered in the positive self-preference direction , we find that the model asserts self-preference on 85% of the examples where it previously did not. Conversely, when steered in the negative direction, we find that the model asserts non-self-preference on 25% of the examples where it previously did not. These findings suggest potential approaches to de-biasing expert orchestrators such as judges and routers, potentially enabling a fair alloca- tion of responses. Further research is necessary to scale this approach to larger models, as well as to determine the impact on orchestration systems in production. This aligns with the Judge Model Development track because the prevalence of self-preference in judges is not negligible especially when it is compared to responses from other models (not humans). One of the key components of the Expert Orchestration Architecture is the judges, which help the router make a better educated decision on which model to direct the query to. One of the main criteria users care about is bias. We show that this bias exists in a specific judge model when given a choice between another model’s response and further mitigate this.


